Welcome to your PulmoCore lesson on
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or
ALS, one of the most important
neuromuscular diseases you'll encounter
as a respiratory therapist.
ALS is a progressive neurodegenerative
disorder that affects both upper and lower motor neurons.
As these neurons deteriorate, patients
lose voluntary muscle control,
including the muscles responsible for
breathing.
Unlike obstructive diseases like asthma or
COPD, the problem here
is not airflow limitation, it's muscle
failure.
Let's break that down.
In ALS, the diaphragm and accessory
muscles gradually weaken.
This leads to reduced tidal volume,
ineffective cough,
and impaired secretion clearance.
Over time, patients develop
hypoventilation, which
means they cannot adequately remove carbon
dioxide.
This results in rising PaCO2, respiratory
acidosis,
and eventually respiratory failure.
Early in the disease, patients may present
with subtle signs
like dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, or
morning headaches.
These are key clues of nocturnal
hypoventilation.
As the disease progresses, you'll see
decreased vital capacity,
weak cough, and increasing dependence on
ventilatory support.
From a board exam perspective, remember
this.
ALS causes respiratory failure due to
muscle weakness, not lung
disease.
The key is recognizing when ventilatory
support is needed, not
just oxygen.
As you move through this lesson, focus on
connecting muscle
weakness to ventilation failure,
interpreting respiratory metrics,
and making timely decisions about support
and escalation.
Because in ALS, early recognition and
intervention can make a
profound difference in patient outcomes.